THU Scoring
eSports for Engineers 22041LTS 

Note: To avoid graphics glitches with the THU sims, pay careful
attention to graphics settings.  Use a dual monitor setup if possible, 
with each monitor set to maximum resolution.  Run
./setWineDisplayResolutoin.sh and set the Windows version to Windows XP.
In Battle of Britain PC Config,
set both 3D Resolution and Campaign Resolution to 1024x768 or 1280x1024.  When
viewing a recon photo, toggle the keyboard "1" key to rotate the view
and press the "0" key to return to the campaign screen.  Run
wine_experimental.sh before installing THU/battleOfBritain.sh.  
(Battle of Britain) is the only game in the default esports for 
engineers package that will not install or run with wine_default.sh
Mig Alley can be run with a single monitor using a workaround -
see FAQ.txt in the main esports-for-engineers directory.
If you follow all of these instructions and use Ubuntu 20.04 LTS
linux, you should be able to run Battle of Britain and
Mig Alley campaigns without graphics problems.

If you follow all these guidelines, you should be able to
experience these classic sims with good quality graphics. To
appreciate the innovative viewing system of these Rowan sims, try flying in 
padlocked target to player view (CTRL F6 in Mig Alley, CTRL F6 or CTRL i 
in Battle of Britain), or try Battle of Britain's roving cam view (ALT v).

In order to enter your score for the THU flight sims, you must record
your flights.

To do this in Mig Alley, set PREFERENCES/View/Gun Camera to "ON" prior
to the flight, then after exiting the 3D view select replay, type a
name for the replay file, and type "Save".  A red indicator light at
the center of the cockpit is lit when the flight is being recorded.
Pressing the "V" key in the 3D view toggles the gun camera (and the
red light) on and off.  Toggle recording off for the uneventful parts
of the flight.

All video segments from a single flight are stored in a single .cam
file.

Note that when viewing a replay you may use a number key to select a
replay control if the mouse isn't working for this purpose.  The
number "1" activates the first control on the left, "2" the second
from left, and so forth.

The flight recording process is similar in Battle of Britain.  Prior
to flight set the Gun Camera to "ON" in SIM CONFIG/View.  The "C" key
toggles recording on and off.

After you've completed a task, copy the recording to the
THU/afterGameReport directory.  You can find the .cam replay file in
stored in THU/MigAlley/WP/drive_c/rowan/mig/Videos or
THU/BattleOfBritain/WP/drive_c/Program Files (x86)/Rowan
Software/Battle Of Britain/VIDEOS.  You can also add other supporting
documents, such as game screenshot png files and your own comments in
a text file, to the afterGameReport directory.  These sims are
sufficiently complicated that each session is a new adventure.
Share the story of your latest adventure in a text file in the
afterGameReport directory!

OBJECTIVE #1: LEARN COMBAT FLIGHT SIM FREE FLIGHT AND DOGFIGHT
OBJECTIVE #2: (ASPIRATIONAL) WIN DYNAMIC CAMPAIGNS 
OBJECTIVE #3: USER DEFINED (can be regular or aspirational)


---------------------------------------------------------------
OKR #1, 1

For each of the following tasks you complete, add 0.05 to your
daily score:

taking off, flying a pattern and landing using only the
trim controls, never the main elevator/aileron/rudder controls, for
the Battle of Britain ME 109, the Battle of Britain Spitfire and the
Mig Alley Mig 15.  This is useful because mastering the trim controls
is very important for success in all the eSports for Engineers flight
sims.

reading all the documentation in the THU directory and
reviewing the replay files, (as a workaround use the number keys
rather than clicking on the review film icons per the documentation,
e.g. press “4” to play a replay and 0 to exit.)  Padlock and then
use the F1 and F6 to view the relative position of the planes during replay.

reading chapters 1 and 2 of Shaw’s “Fighter Combat:
Tactics and Maneuvering”, Naval Institute Press, 1985.

skimming the rest of Shaw’s book “Fighter Combat”

flying all the missions in the Quick Mission directory,
flying the MiG 15 (and adjusting the manual gunsight) whenever
possible, and also flying all 4 of the UN flyable aircraft

---------------------------------------------------------------
OKR #1, 1

For this OKR, which is a dogfight, you can fly either a Korean
War Jet in Mig Alley or a WWII aircraft in Battle of Britain.

If you choose the jet dogfight, run ./migAlley.sh and choose Single
Player/Quick Mission/One on One.  Set flight to Red.  You will be
flying the MiG 15 against a F86 Saber.  For the MiG, gunsight should be
set to manual for best realism; use the “T” and “Y” keys to set the
aiming circle diameter to the apparent wingspan. All settings in
Preferences, for example autopilot skill, realism etc. should be set
to the maximum value.

If you choose WWII planes, run ./battleOfBritain.sh, set Sim
Config/Flight Options to Maximum.  As always, all configuration
setting should be set for maximum realism.  Choose Quick
Shots/Dogfighting/One on One.  You will be flying a Spitfire against a
ME 109 E4.

Where r is the skill level of the the highest level AI pilot you
defeated in a dogfight (hero=5, ace=4, veteran=3, regular=2, poor=1,
novice=0)

score= {1-(5-r)/5}*.25, maximum score .25

---------------------------------------------------------------
OKR #1, 2

Same as OKR #1, 1 except you select a many vs. many dogfight scenario.
Be sure to read the documentation about the challenging many vs.
many scenario before attempting this.

Where k is the number of planes you shoot down,

score= {1-(3-k)/3}*.35, maximum score .35
---------------------------------------------------------------
OKR #2, 1

Your score is .5 if you win any of the 4 RAF mini-campaigns or any of
the 4 Luftwaffe min-campaigns, otherwise 0.  This is self-graded - you
decide whether you won or not, but explain your decision in a text
file placed in THU/afterGameReport along with supporting game output
files and screenshots.

OKR #2, 2

score=1 if you win the entire Battle of Britain (playing either the Great Britain
or the German side), or if you win the Mig Alley Spring Offensive, 0 otherwise.  
A score of 1 is valid for one month.  Save files supporting any claims to victory 
to THU/afterGameReport as with the previous OKR's.

