EXECUTIVE FUNCTION is composed of three mental abilities: working memory, inhibition, and flexibility. The kinds of activities for which you need executive function include planning ahead, holding multiple ideas in your head at once, resisting temptations, and coming up with creative solutions to problems.

1. focus and goal-direction: How good were you at being focused and goal directed
2. serial processing: How good were you at planning and taking steps one after another (i.e., planning and executing subgoals for a larger goal)? This includes processing tasks sequentially, being able to break down goals into tasks, plan tasks in a particular order, execute on goals and tasks in planned order).
3. channeling attention: How good were you at controlling and sustaining your attention (ignoring distractions, focusing for long periods when the task must be done but is not particularly interesting or when you are tired, noticing when the situation has changed and adjusting what you are doing as needed)
4. solving unfamiliar problems: How good were you at solving problems you’ve never seen before
5. organization: How good were you at keeping yourself neat and organized
6. flexibility: How good were you at being mentally flexible (able to change the course of your thoughts or actions based on a change in the situation)

EMOTIONAL SELF-REGULATION is being able to monitor, evaluate, and modify your emotions.  There are four steps to effectively manage an emotionally charged situation: (1) realize you are in an emotionally charged situation, (2) choose what to pay attention to within the situation, (3) choose how you interpret the situation, and (4) choose your response to the situation.

1. I noticed how I was feeling, including when I was upset.
2. I could tell what my feelings were.
3. I could change how I was feeling if I wanted to.
4. I could soothe myself when I was upset.
5. I could control my impulses by starting or stopping actions or words that were triggered automatically by strong feelings when I was upset.
6. I could choose to think about something else when I was upset

MEMORY comes in short-term and long-term varieties. Episodic memory is about the stories of your life, the episodes, whereas semantic memory is about concepts and facts, and procedural memory is about how to do things.  Learning happens in two stages—encoding and storage—and recalling what you’ve learned involves retrieval.

CREATIVITY is the ability to come up with new, useful ideas and creations.  In order to get high-quality creativity, it helps to focus on quantity—generating more and more products. Also, it helps to have a skill or an area of expertise to tap into—or multiple areas, so that you can find unusual connections between them.  Being in a positive mood may aid creativity, but emotional intensity—regardless of whether it’s positive or negative—may play an even deeper role.

The quantity of my creative work was high; I was prolific.
My creative work was novel and/or useful.
I regularly achieved “flow” (a state of being fully immersed in an activity, having an energized focus, and enjoying the process—not just the outcome—of the activity).
I was good at lateral thinking (solving problems through an indirect approach, often by seeing things from a different perspective).
I was good at divergent thinking (generating creative ideas by coming up with many possible solutions).
In my creative activity, I used hard skills (learned abilities and enhanced through practice).

Excepts from Ricker, "Smarter Tomorrow" (2021)
