Seven principles fall under the maxim “Think it through.”

Evoking deep processing. The more cognitive operations one performs while
    paying attention to such operations, the more likely it is that one will
    later recall that information (Craig et al., 2006; Craik & Lockhart, 1972).
    This is the most obvious implication of the maxim “Think it through.”
    For example, if you formulate an example of how every one of these
    principles can be used in a specific situation, you will remember them
    much better than if you simply read and understand them.

Using desirable difficulty. We can think of this as the Goldilocks rule (not
     too hot, not too cold—just right!). Learning is best when the task is
     not so easy as to be boring but not so hard as to be over the learner’s
     head (Bjork, 1988, 1999; VanLehn et al., 2007). To get the most out of
     thinking it through, the person needs to be as engaged as possible—no
     more, no less. For example, if you are good at math, you will need more
     challenging examples of new mathematical concepts to stay engaged
     than would someone who has less knowledge.

Eliciting the generation effect. Simply recalling information—especially when
     effort is required—strengthens memory for that piece of informa-
     tion; the mere act of digging information out of memory reconstructs
     and strengthens the mental representation of the information. For
     example, a consequence of this principle is that frequent testing can
     enhance learning if it leads learners to recall relevant information (But-
     ler & Roediger, 2007; Roediger & Karpicke, 2006).

Engaging in deliberate practice. In some cases, to learn effectively you need
     to pay attention to and think through specific aspects of what you are
     learning. In particular, feedback helps you to correct aspects of a men-
     tal representation when it isn’t optimal (Brown, Roediger, & McDan-
     iel, 2014; Ericsson, Krampe, & Tesch-Romer, 1993). For example, when
     learning French, it’s good to have a native speaker listen to you and
     carefully correct your pronunciation. Such feedback is most effective
     when learners use “deliberate practice.” Deliberate practice occurs
     when you pay careful attention to mistakes and use the ways that an
     error differs from the correct performance to correct subsequent perfor-
     mance. (This principle alone, however, is not enough to make you into
     an expert; Hambrick et al., 2014.)

These first four principles all focus strongly on the fact that more pro-
cessing of the relevant information will produce better memory. The next
three principles focus on ways to induce people to engage in additional
processing. (My interrupting here and pointing this out should allow you
to create two large groups for this set of principles, the first four and the
second three, which respects the fact that we can store easily no more than
four units in a “chunk,” as discussed below.)

Using interleaving. Instead of just focusing on one type of problem (e.g.,
    when doing math), it’s best to intermix different types of problems.
    The same principle implies (but to my knowledge has not yet been
    investigated) that when learning French, it’s best to do a bit of studying
    French, then some history, then some math, and then back to French.
    This makes sense because it’s easier to pay attention to something new
    than to sustain paying attention to the same material, extended over
    time. For example, all else being equal, you would probably learn the
    material in this chapter more effectively if you did something else after
    you finish this section, and returned to the second set of principles later.

Inducing dual coding. If I give you a short paragraph to remember, you will
    recall it better if I also include some relevant illustrations. In general,
    presenting both verbal and visual material enhances memory. In this
    case, the brain stores multiple representations in memory (some verbal,
    some visual—which are stored in different parts of the brain), which
    gives you multiple shots at later digging the information out of storage
    (Kosslyn, 1994; Mayer, 2001; Moreno & Valdez, 2005). Furthermore, if
    you are given only a name or a verbal description to remember, your
    memory will be vastly improved if you can visualize (i.e., form a men-
    tal image of) the named object or scene: not only will you create a sec-
    ond type of representation (in addition to the verbal material itself) but
    the mere effort of visualizing the described object or scene will enhance
    subsequent memory.

Evoking emotion. Leading someone to feel emotion when experiencing an
    event generally will enable him or her to recall that event more effec-
    tively. Emotion focuses attention and also causes the brain to devote
    extra resources to storing the information. Negative emotions in par-
    ticular narrow attention and focus one on details. For such negative
    emotions, beta-blockers will remove this extra boost, which hints at
    the underlying pharmacological events that produce this extra process-
    ing (Erk et al., 2003; Levine & Pizarro, 2004; McGaugh, 2003, 2004).
    For example, if you are anxious about how an interview will go (and do
    not take beta-blockers), you probably will remember more details about
    the interview than if you are not anxious.

To summarize, I’ve just reviewed seven principles, all of which are spe-
cial cases of the maxim “Think it through.”

Principles that underlie “Make and use associations”

The second overarching maxim is “Make and use associations.” It is useful
to distinguish two general classes of these principles.

Structure information by using associations The first class is “Structure
information by using associations.” Five principles fall in this category:

Promoting chunking. As we saw in the case of the marathon runner who could
    memorize staggering numbers of randomly selected digits (Ericsson
    et al., 1980), you can use associations you already have in your mem-
    ory to organize material into relatively few chunks (organized units).
    People can easily store in memory three or four chunks—and remark-
    ably, each of these units itself can contain three or four chunks. For
    example, if you want to learn a list of sixteen principles, figuring out
    ways to organize them into roughly four (or fewer) groups of four (or
    fewer) principles each should help. Organizing material into manage-
    able units clearly facilitates learning (e.g., Brown, Roediger, & McDan-
    iel, 2014; Mayer & Moreno, 2003).

Building on prior associations. When learning something new, the more asso-
    ciations you can find with information already stored in memory, the
    better (e.g., Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Glenberg & Robertson,
    1999; Mayer, 2001). For example, when meeting a new person, you
    might better remember his name by associating his face with that of
    someone with the same name whom you already know. One way to do
    this is to visualize the face of the person you know and then morph
    that mental image into the face of the new person (Kosslyn, 1994). If
    you do this a few times, you will associate the new person’s face with
    that of the familiar person. And the familiar person’s face is already
    associated with the appropriate name.
    The fact that prior associations can be used to learn new information
    resolves an old conundrum: At one time researchers worried about a “para-
    dox of the expert,” which hinged on the fact that the more you know, the
    easier it is to learn even more (Reder & Anderson, 1980; Smith, Adams,
    & Schorr, 1978). The intuition was that the more you know, the “fuller”
    memory should be—and hence it should be harder, not easier, to store new
    information. However, researchers have learned that the more information
    you already know, the more existing associations you can use to store new
    information. The more branches you have, the more leaves and fruit can be
    hung on this structure. Hence there’s no actual paradox.

Presenting foundational material first. When complex information is to be
     acquired, learning is enhanced when a teacher takes advantage of exist-
     ing associations to provide the most basic material first, and then inte-
     grates new material a bit at a time (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000;
     Wandersee, Mintzes, & Novak, 1994). Presenting foundational material
     first provides a backbone to which one can attach additional informa-
     tion, allowing an organized mental structure to be built up over time.
     For example, my presenting the two general maxims first should have
     given you a structure for understanding the specific principles.
    
The following two principles build on the previous ones but focus spe-
cifically on the relationship between examples and underlying principles.
(By interrupting here and pointing this out, I hope to help you create two
large chunks, which should help you get your mental arms around this
material.)

Exploiting appropriate examples. Abstract ideas cannot be fully understood
     without examples. But examples must be memorable, in part by being
     associated with prior information. Multiple examples of the same
     material must be associated with each other so that they form a cluster
     that is associated with the to-be-learned material. For example, when
     teaching the concept of far transfer, it’s not enough for me to provide
     the example that debate techniques learned in class should then be
     used months later when arguing politics with friends. You would need
     a few different examples of far transfer, and I would need to make sure
     that you have associated them with each other, even though on the
     surface they may appear very different (Hakel & Halpern, 2005).

Relying on principles, not rote. Learning typically requires not just becom-
     ing familiar with examples but also understanding the underlying
     principles that organize and integrate examples (Kozma & Russell,
     1997; Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000). For example, the key to far
     transfer is to distinguish between surface characteristics (the particular
     example) and underlying deep characteristics (which tell you which
     knowledge should be transferred to the present case). For instance,
     the principles of debate can also be used in teaching, but that doesn’t
     require becoming confrontational (a surface characteristic of debate)
     but rather being sensitive to the other person’s goals and perspectives
     (a deep characteristic). The principles must be associated with the
     examples. In general, making explicit the ways that information relates
     abstractly (at what is called a “deep structural level” in the literature) to
     other information enhances memory (Chi & VanLehn, 2012).

Create rich retrieval cues The other class of principles that falls under the
     maxim “Make and use associations” is “Create rich retrieval cues.” The key
     idea here is that you need to associate distinctive information with what
     you learn so that you later can be effectively reminded of it when you want
     to recall it.  Dynamic mental representations arise from recent experiences or
     thoughts, and often are conscious; thus they are easy to recall. Struc-
     tural representations, in contrast, are like the crates and boxes in that
     giant warehouse in the last scene of Raiders of the Lost Ark. We can retain
     uncounted numbers of such mental representations, and they often aren’t
     well organized. We access these representations by using cues and remind-
     ers. For example, you might associate one of those crates with a coffin,
     and hence seeing that shape would remind you of it (and you then could
     search for other such shapes, if the initial one turned out to be incorrect).
     Thus, to be easily recalled, it’s crucial that structural representations include
     characteristics that makes them easily cued later, which can include being
     associated with a distinctive time and place. The following principles can
     produce such cues.

Creating associative chaining (a.k.a using story telling). Stories are built on a
    series of interlocking causes and effects—this is the essence of a plot.
    Creating an interlocking sequence of associations that has a narrative
    arc—that is, a story—to integrate material will not only help you cre-
    ate larger chunks (stories are one way to build associations to create
    chunks) but, more than that, you also can use each part of the story
    to cue the next part when you later recall the material. Such cueing
    can greatly facilitate later recall of the information incorporated into
    the story (Bower & Clark, 1969; Graesser, Olde, & Klettke, 2002). For
    example, to learn the principles underlying the “Think it through”
    maxim, you could create a story about a friend who uses each of these
    principles, one at a time, in an effort to learn the computer program-
    ming language Python, adopting a new principle when the previous
    one proves inadequate.

Using spaced practice. Cramming may be an efficient way to study, but it’s a
    bad way to learn. Here’s an analogy: when I was young, I had a black
    wooden desk. I thought it would look much better if I painted it white.
    Being in a hurry, I ignored the advice to use several thin coats of paint
    rather than one thick coat. I poured on a single thick coat. At first, it
    seemed just fine; the black paint was covered up. But in practically no
    time, the paint began to chip—and soon the desk was a blotchy mess,
    much uglier than it was in the first place. Something similar happens
    with memory: Trying to store information in one fell swoop leaves it
    vulnerable to being lost. One reason for this is that if you cram, you
    will have only one set of retrieval cues, the associations set up the one
    time you stored the information. If you instead spread out studying
    over time, you will associate the material with lots of different cues
    (such as cues in the room or rooms where you study, your feelings at
    the time, and thoughts you have while considering the information).
    It is much better to use information repeatedly over a relatively long
    span of time than to try to cram it in all at once in the course of learn-
    ing it (Brown, Roediger, & McDaniel, 2014; Cepeda et al., 2006, 2008;
    Cull, 2000). For example, when learning this material you might want
    to read it once, and then reread it a few times to review.

Establishing different contexts. Far transfer is the holy grail of learning. As
    noted earlier, far transfer occurs when information learned in one con-
    text (e.g., a classroom) is retrieved and applied in a very different con-
    text (e.g., to a seemingly unrelated problem in a work environment
    years later). Far transfer appears to be possible in large part because
    one has learned a group of varied examples and has a firm grasp of the
    principles that underlie the relevant material (Hakel & Halpern, 2005;
    Van Merrienboer et al., 2006). But it also depends critically on know-
    ing when learned information is relevant. To facilitate this, one should
    associate the material with numerous different contexts. For example,
    studying in different places will enhance your ability later to use the
    information in different contexts.

Avoiding interference. Distinctive retrieval cues are crucial in part because
    they can help the learner avoid interference from other information
    (Adams, 1967; Anderson & Neely, 1996). Psychologists have docu-
    mented two types of interference. Proactive interference occurs when
    material you have learned previously interferes with learning new
    information. For example, if you learned Spanish, you might have a
    problem learning that “de” is pronounced “duh” in French, not “day”
    as it is in Spanish. Retroactive interference occurs when learning new
    material impairs your ability to recall previously learned material. In
    the language example, once you learn the French pronunciation, you
    might have difficulty recalling the Spanish one. Creating distinctive
    retrieval cues can help you avoid both types of interference (e.g., you
    could associate the French pronunciation with an image of a French
    person having difficulty understanding why a learner is having this
    problem, perhaps dismissively saying “duh,” and a Spanish person tak-
    ing a siesta in the middle of the “day”).

Excerpt from Kosslyn, "Building The Intentional University", MIT Press (2017) p. 149.
