                   Google’s OKR Playbook

No one has more collective experience in implementing OKRs than Google. As
the company has scaled (and scaled), it has periodically issued OKR guidelines
and templates. The following excerpts are drawn mostly from internal sources
and reprinted with Google’s permission. (Note: This is Google’s approach to
OKRs. Your approach may—and should—differ.)
                                       —
At Google, we like to think big. We use a process called objectives and key
results (OKRs) to help us communicate, measure, and achieve those lofty goals.

Our actions determine Google’s future. As we’ve seen repeatedly—in Search,
in Chrome, in Android—a team composed of a few percent of the company’s
workforce, acting in concert toward an ambitious common goal, can change an
entire mature industry in less than two years. Thus it is crucial that as Google
employees and managers we make conscious, careful, and informed choices
about how we allocate our time and energy—as individuals and as members of
teams. OKRs are the manifestation of those careful choices, and the means by
which we coordinate the actions of individuals to achieve great collective goals.
    We use OKRs to plan what people are going to produce, track their progress
vs. plan, and coordinate priorities and milestones between people and teams. We
also use OKRs to help people stay focused on the most important goals, and help
them avoid being distracted by urgent but less important goals.
    OKRs are big, not incremental—we don’t expect to hit all of them. (If we do,
we’re not setting them aggressively enough.) We grade them with a color scale
to measure how well we did:
    0.0–0.3 is red
    0.4–0.6 is yellow
    0.7–1.0 is green

Poorly done/managed OKRs are a waste of time, an empty management gesture.
Well done OKRs are a motivational management tool that helps make it clear to
teams what’s important, what to optimize, and what tradeoffs to make during
their day-to-day work.
   Writing good OKRs isn’t easy, but it’s not impossible, either. Pay attention to
the following simple rules:

     Objectives are the “Whats.” They:
      express goals and intents;
      are aggressive yet realistic;
      must be tangible, objective, and unambiguous; should be obvious to a
      rational observer whether an objective has been achieved.
      The successful achievement of an objective must provide clear value
      for Google.

     Key Results are the “Hows.” They:
      express measurable milestones which, if achieved, will advance
      objective(s) in a useful manner to their constituents;
      must describe outcomes, not activities. If your KRs include words like
      “consult,” “help,” “analyze,” or “participate,” they describe activities.
      Instead, describe the end-user impact of these activities: “publish
      average and tail latency measurements from six Colossus cells by
      March 7,” rather than “assess Colossus latency”;
      must include evidence of completion. This evidence must be available,
      credible, and easily discoverable. Examples of evidence include change
      lists, links to docs, notes, and published metrics reports.


                Committed vs. Aspirational OKRs

OKRs have two variants, and it is important to differentiate between them:
   Commitments are OKRs that we agree will be achieved, and we will be
willing to adjust schedules and resources to ensure that they are delivered.
      The expected score for a committed OKR is 1.0; a score of less than 1.0
      requires explanation for the miss, as it shows errors in planning and/or
      execution.
   By contrast, aspirational OKRs express how we’d like the world to look, even
though we have no clear idea how to get there and/or the resources necessary to
deliver the OKR.
      Aspirational OKRs have an expected average score of 0.7, with high
      variance.

Excerpt from Doerr, "Measure What Matters", Penguin (2017), p. 255.

For more about OKR's: https://www.whatmatters.com/faqs/okr-meaning-definition-example/

