WORKAROUNDS AND TIPS FOR EACH GAME

Each of these sims has its own special magic, and, in most cases, it’s
own idiosyncrasies when it comes to running on linux.  Great strides
have been made recently in getting these old Microsoft Windows sim
running smoothly on linux, but for each sim there are workarounds to
remember and, often, configurations to set up prior to playing.

MON:

Once wine is installed, simply select MON in ./launcher.py or execute
the shell script in the MON directory as follows:

./wBridge5.sh

to run the free wBridge 5 Contract Bridge program, a worthy opponent
that has won multiple computer Bride world championships.  The first
time you run this or other wine games, you may be asked whether to
install mono and gecko.  Install gecko but not mono.  

Run

./bcalc.sh

from launcher.py or the command line to run Bridge analysis software.

MON WORKAROUNDS: Since wBridge 5 and Q Plus Bridge lack suit fonts
when run with the default Ubuntu 24.04 version of wine, it is
recommended to run these games under lutris with the lutris
configurations provided.  The runThisScriptFirst.sh script
installs lutris; from the ese directory run 

python3 lutris_restore.py

to load the ese game profiles, then simply type 

lutris

to see a graphical menu of the games that need lutris.

If you install the additional linux packages per the instructions 
in ./runThisScriptFirst.sh, bcalc will automatically switch to a 
native linux version with sharper graphics.

TUE:

If the name “Grand Prix Legends” doesn’t ring a bell, read the article
“Why I Loved Hardcore Racing sim Grand Prix Legends, the story of the
racing sim that won’t die” at this link:

https://www.pcgamer.com/why-i-loved-hardcore-racing-sim-grand-prix-legends/

Statistical analysis has recently confirmed the claim made on Grand
Prix Legends (GPL)’s release back in 1998 that the old open-wheel F1
racecars in the sim were the hardest ever cars to drive:

https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2020/10/17/engineers-not-racers-are-the-true-drivers-of-success-in-motor-sport

After practicing with the dozens of different cars and tracks, delve
deeper by reading about car setups in the DOC/setupGuides folder, then
practice with different setups on the skidpad tracks.  Practise
driving with low grip on the front wheels, make a few donuts by
exceeding the traction budget on the rear wheels, experiment with
pushing vs. loose, soft vs. stiff setups, etc. on the skidpad and
complex test tracks (under 67 season).

TUE WORKAROUNDS: Install GPL by running it from launcher.py
or cd to TUE and type
./gpl.sh

When done with the installation, exit from the 2D GEM+ launcher.
Then run lutris (see above) to run the 3D game for the first time.
After the first run in lutris, you should be able to run
without issue by running

./gpl.sh

directly.

GPL used to lose keyboard focus regularly with
earlier versions of wine, less so recently.  If this occurs,
typing regular characters on the keyboard will have no effect.  To
counter this, you need to get accustomed to grabbing the keyboard
focus back again via:

1. use <ALT> TAB and <ALT><SH> TAB to highlight the window in which
GPL is running

2. press <ALT> F6 to restore keyboard focus to the GPL window

Also note: press F10 (after restoring keyboard focus, see above) to
toggle between in-car view and chase view.  Stop the car and press
<ESC> ENTER to exit the GPL 3D view.  On the skidpad track your car
starts out embedded in a roadside barrier.  Free it by pressing <SH>
R.  If that doesn’t work, exit the 3D view, re-enter and try <SH> R
again.

Note: GPL is the only sim in eSports for Engineers that seems to run
without adjustments on every recent linux distro.  If using a distro
other than Ubuntu, however, you may encounter a blurry text problem,
probably because your graphics drivers are misconfigured.
Run the supplied script file “runThisIfGPLTextUnreadable.sh” as a
workaround.

WED:

WED brings us to the timeless game of chess, enhanced with the latest
artificial intelligence.  There are two AI sparing partners;
stockfish, running on the SCID chess platform, and, on the nibbler
platform, Leela Chess Zero.  Leela Chess Zero is an open source clone
of the world champion deep learning code Alpha Zero.

Stockfish has superhuman strength and plays in an inscrutable way
without ever making a blunder.  It’s no fun to play stockfish – use it
to analyze your games after you’ve sparred with a human-strength
version of Leela Chess Zero.  The deep learning “brain” of Leela Chess
Zero is it’s network, a file of numbers which determines its strength.
Start with the smallest network,
INSTALL/otherWeights/tinygyal-8.pb.gz, which will occasionally drop
pieces in a very human-like way.  To further reduce its strength, and
increase it’s spontaneity, set Versus/Temperature to 1 and
Versus/TempDecayMoves to 20 in nibbler.

For an interesting game, open the INSTALL/25000grandmasterGames.si4
grandmaster database in SCID, bring up Tree Window:
25000grandmasterGames, and during the opening, every time it’s your
turn in nibbler, roll a dice, update the position in SCID and
use the number on the dice to choose your move from the top 6 grandmaster
moves listed in the SCID tree window.  That way you don’t have to
memorize openings, and you get a very different game every time.  When
you’ve run out of database moves it’s you against Leela Chess Zero.
After the game, copy the game from nibbler via File/Write PGN to
Clipboard and paste it into SCID via Edit/Copy Clipboard Text as PGN
game.  Score your game by setting the SCID Tools/Analysis Engine to
stockfish, setting the blunder threshold to 2 in SCID
Analysis:stockfish annotate, and thus using stockfish to analyze your
game.  Reviewing the game is a great way to learn, and is often
surprising.  Your score for WED is inversely proportional to the
number of blunders stockfish found in your play.

WED WORKAROUNDS: you will need to navigate to the Alpha Chess Zero
binary and tinygyal-8 (or other network file) from Nibbler.  Choose
Versus/Play this Color in Nibbler when you want Alpha Zero to move.
When Nibbler opens a dialog box it often puts it beneath the Nibbler
chess board window on the screen, so look for an occluded dialog box
with <ALT> TAB if Nibbler isn’t responding to your keyboard commands.

THU:

Now that Grand Prix Legends has taught you to pilot high-powered
vehicles in two dimensions, it’s time to up your game by adding
another dimension and a lot more backstory.  Install flightgear in
Ubuntu by following the instructions in the script

./optionalFlightgearInstall.sh

Unless you’re very familiar with flight simulators, it’s a good idea
to start with takeoff and landing practice using the open source
flightgear simulator and the venerable Cessna 172P aircraft.  Later
you’ll be glad you learned how to manage the vertical velocity
indicator and how to “step on the ball” to prevent a spin.  Download
the other aircraft per the instructions, then progress from the Cessna
to the spitfire and bf109 in the Battle of Britain directory, and then
the F86 and MiG15 in the Mig Alley directory.  Learn the cockpit
instruments in these planes and practice startup, takeoff and landing.

The THU games are two classic flight and war simulators, Mig Alley and
Battle of Britain.  These two sims run on the same game engine and
share many commands and idiosyncrasies.  As with GPL, the historical
setting of these sims was chosen for maximum challenge.  The fighter
planes available during the Battle of Britain planes were underpowered
and cumbersome – imagine competing in an auto race while constantly
trying not to over-rev your engine in a car that has only two gears,
and you’ll have some idea of the cockpit workload of Battle of Britain
pilots.  These early planes used deer-rifle caliber ammunition, so the
best you could realistically hope for was to shoot a hole in the
radiator of your opponent and cripple him with a slow leak.  The
dogfighting AI is impressive, and you play the roles of both pilot and
general.

Mig Alley is like GPL in that you’re dealing with overpowered machines
which lack modern control systems.  It was the dawn of the jet age
before missiles, a period when many experimental technologies were
being put to the test for the first time.  The well-known Mig Alley
campaign was one of the first unscripted campaigns, set within the
historical context of the Korean war.  Each time you play Mig Alley
campaign, you recreate the air war in Korean based on your decisions
and performance.  Learn to zoom in on the 2D campaign map view and
turn on icons, e.g. troops and tanks, to study the evolving
battlefield situation before you start each mission.

THU WORKAROUNDS: Run both Mig Alley and Battle of Britain using lutris,
as neither of these games run well under the default ubuntu 24.04
version of wine. (See above for information about how to load
the lutris profiles for ese games.)  For Mig Alley, a dual
monitor setup is recommended.  
In ./setWineDisplayResolution.sh graphics tab only the
"Allow The Window Manger To Control the Windows" should be selected.
Following all these steps should prevent graphics problems.

Also run the Century of Flight civilian flight simulator via lutris
the first time you run it; subsequent runs should work using the
default ubuntu 24.04 version of wine.

If you don't follow all these steps, here are some of the problems
you'll run in to: both sims place a black box over the 3D view window
in many situations - unless there is a second monitor, in which case
the black box is harmlessly displayed on the second monitor.  (Note:
since source code for both sims is available, this is probably easy to
fix.  See the Issues tab on the project github page.)

For Mig Alley, first check your wine configuration by running the
script

./setWineDisplayResolution.sh

Select the Graphics tab in the Wine configuration dialog.  The tic box
labeled "Allow The Window Manger To Control the Windows" should be
checked, the other tic boxes unchecked.  If you run into graphics
problems, you may want to try other settings in this tab - see the
DEBUG folder under the Mig Alley directory if needed.  (Briefly, if
you run into graphics glitches, try using a dual monitor setup.  If
that doesn't work, select "Allow the window manager to decorate
windows" and "Emulate virtual desktop" in the
./setWineDisplayResolution.sh Graphics tab.  Set virtual desktop size
to your max screen resoluion.

Any time you encounter graphics glitches in 3D view, press <ALT> X to
return to the 2D view.  The workarounds are the same for the other THU
sim, Battle of Britain.)

Again, to avoid graphics glitches, use a dual monitor setup for the
THU games.  Check that the monitors are set to max resolution via
right click/Display Settings on an empty Ubuntu desktop, or by running
the supplied 

./delayedMonitorReset.sh 0 

script (try both methods - one or the other may not work
correctly with your monitors).

Note: If the Mig Alley display is occluded by a black screen in a dual
monitor setup, that's probably because your monitors are not
configured correctly; try using different monitors.  If unable to
solve this problem, turn on virtual desktop using
./setWineDisplayResolution.sh and set your monitors to maximum
resolution, which you can do via: ./delayedMonitorReset.sh 0

When in the 2D campaign view in either sim, close any extra dialog
boxes before selecting a recon photo.  You may not be able to click on
the recon photo camera movement controls.  If this happens, use number
key commands instead:

1. rotate recon photo clockwise, press 1 again to stop rotation

2. rotate counter-clockwise

3. zoom in

4. zoom out

5. reset zoom

0. return to 2D campaign view

Number keys work similarly on the replay screen.

Note that the mouse is not used in Mig Alley 3D view - use num pad
keys to change the view (or use a head tracking device - see
THU/MigAlley/DOC for details.)

This should not be a problem if you've followed all the recommended
steps, but whenever you get a chance, set or reset the resolution in
Mig Alley (via PREFERENCES) to 1024x768. ./wine_experimental.sh
might give you higher resolution options in PREFERENCES.

Before running Battle of Britain, Run the script

./setWineDisplayResolution.sh

and open the Graphics tab to check that the tic mark configuration is
the same as for Mig Alley (see above).  If you run into graphics
glitches in 3D view you may want to try other settings here - see the
information in the Battle of Britain DEBUG directory for other
settings.

Note: Useful keys when flying Mig Alley are <ALT> F6 to see a view
from the padlocked aircraft, and num pad Enter to glance at your
instrument panel.  In Battle of Britain, use <ALT> F6 or <CTRL> i 
to see a view from the padlocked aircraft.  In a dogfight it can be useful to fly
using this view along with the orientation aids in the upper right and
left corners of the 3D view.

FRI:

FRI WORKAROUNDS: KaTrain expects to run on your graphics card (GPU),
so install opencl per the instructions for this purpose.  The
standalone katago binary does not use the GPU, but rather uses
openblass on your CPU; again, refer to the detailed instructions to
install all the needed libraries.  These packages are automatically 
installed when you copy/paste the sudo command line output by the 
script 

./runThisScriptFirst.sh

Even if you can't configure katago, you can still play against gnugo, but
without the benefit of annotation heatmaps. (Note that for chess,
banksiaGui.sh in the WED directory provides a numerical heatmap
overlay for Leela Chess Zero.)

SAT:

SAT introduces the most famous combat flight sim lineage of them all,
Falcon 4.0.  The free and open source version, Free Falcon 6, is best
approached after practicing with the flightgear f16.  Flightgear uses
simplified commands, and it models perhaps 1/3 of the f16’s systems,
so it’s a good place to start.  Practice landing and takeoffs with
flightgear, and learn all the commands provided by this simpler take
on the f16.  Also practice taking off and landing with the flightgear
MiG 21, but don’t study the MiG 21 avionics as preparation for Free
Falcon, because for simplicity all aircraft in the games derived from
Falcon 4.0 use f16 avionics).

Start with the simplest and oldest version, Falcon 4 Allied Force,
and then progress to Free Falcon (and then to the BMS versions,
if you want more realism.)  The Falcon 4 Allied Force manual is the
best starting point, and applies pretty well to all versions.  The
Tacview flight review utility works with all versions.

Note that the first time you run Free Falcon, it unpacks and inflates
a lot of files before starting.  The Tacview utility tracks all the
activity that occurred during a mission or TE (tactical engagement for
training.)  Free Falcon includes two historically accurate campaigns,
one (Israeli Classic) featuring the decade of Arab-Israeli wars from
roughly 1970 to 1980 and the other the 1990’s Balkan’s conflict.

SAT WORKAROUNDS: Free Falcon crashes in the Israel Classic theater
when you start a Yom Kippur or Invasion of Lebanon campaign.  As a
workaround, several campaigns from these wars were started on MS
Windows and then saved for use here.  You can choose from among saved
campaigns (see CAMPAIGN/SAVED) where you fly for an Arab country or
for Israel, and you also have a choice among different aircraft and
roles.  Note that Free Falcon/Isreali Classic does not crash in the
1967 Six Day War campaign, so this is a good campaign to try first.

Optional: there are three more recent versions of Falcon 4.0 available
as separate downloads.  Like GPL, Falcon 4.0 continues to improve two 
decades after its original release.  The modern versions of Falcon 4.0,
are BMS 4.32, BMS 4.33 and the best-in-class BMS 4.35.  For
BMS 4.32 you need falcon4.exe from the original 1998 Falcon 4, for
the others you need the entire 1998 Falcon 4, which can
be purchased for a small price from gog.com, see 
SAT/DOC/.RecommendingBenchmarkSims.pdf

BMS 4.32 is (relatively) simple, but still a big step up in terms of
graphics and realism from Free Falcon; it also includes a historical
Kuwait campaign.  It uses 20 GB of disk space and runs on modest
hardware.  For a detailed comparison between Falcon 4 Allied Force and
BMS 4.32, see SAT/DOC/Additional Documentation/AF to FBMS Guide v1.37.pdf

BMS 4.33 is more complex and realistic and comes with historical
Vietnam and Somalia campaigns.  It takes 40 GB of disk space and has
roughly 10% lower frame rate than BMS 4.32 on the same hardware.

The best combat flight simulator or any type available today may well
be BMS 4.35, which ratchets up the complexity, realism and overall
quality still further.  It achieves this by using DX11 with the latest
wine vulkan drivers.  It takes 44 GB of disk space and has slightly
higher frame rate than 4.33.  All versions run adequately on a 5 year old PC.

Once installation is done, cd to the esports-for-engineers-v41 directory
and type

./launcher.py

to play the games and track your weekly score.



